On this date, August the 4th, 1987, we will have an
interview with Dr. John Wilkins, Jr. of
Greenville, Texas. Dr. Wilkins' father was
president of the Texas Veterinary Medical
Association in 1912 and was instrumental in
passing the first Veterinary Licensing Act in
Texas. Dr. Wilkins, Sr. was a member of the first
Veterinary Examining Board, and Dr. Wilkins, Jr.
has followed in his footsteps. Dr. Wilkins Jr. is a
1949 graduate of Texas A&M University and has been
a member of the Veterinary Examining Board for
several terms. The interview will follow
shortly.
This afternoon, the fourth day of August 1987,
it's our pleasure to be in the office of Dr. Johnny
Wilkins, Jr., who is a very illustrious man in his
own right. He has seen better in medicine from
considerable of the early days, especially
through his father. And I think that would be a nice
place to begin our interview this afternoon. Tell
us, Dr. Wilkins, about your father, his birth and
his early bringing up and where it was and how it all
came about. He's a native Kentuckian. He was born
and raised in Murray, Kentucky. And as far as his
schooling there, I'm not acquainted with it. I
don't have the information. But he did attend
undergraduate school in Tennessee. But I don't
recall the... the name of the school, but you do
have it on the vitae that I sent you. And then he came
to Texas, taught school in Mayo Normal in
Commerce, Texas, which is now East Texas State
University. And he taught in the Oddfellas School
in Cumbee, Texas. taught science and English, and
there he married my mother, who was a student, and
then from there he went to veterinary school in
Indiana. Graduated about 19 and 8, I believe, 19
and 8 or 19 and 10. So your mother was born in Cumbie?
Yes. She came from Cumbie, yes. She was from
Cumbie, yes. Did he tell you any of his experiences
in medical school? No, if he did, Bob, it's been so
long that, of course, he's been dead now since 52,
which is 30-some odd years, and I wish I had him to
talk to again. What year was he born again?
Bob, I don't remember. I don't remember the date on
it. Okay.
If you didn't discuss his schooling, you didn't
have any favorite school jokes to tell you? No. I'm
sure he told them to me back years ago, but I've
forgotten. I just don't recall that. School
stories or whatever. Following his graduation,
he came back to Texas. This was about 1910, right?
Yes, about 1910. Looking back in the history of the
Practice Act of Texas and the Texas Veterinary
Medical Association. He was quite an active
organization man from the start. Did he tell you
anything about the Texas Veterinary Medical
Association at that time, its beginnings?
He did have, he was quite active in both the, I
think, in the state association and he was quite
active in the examining board holding license
number three. And he and Mr. Sam Rayburn were very
instrumental in getting the Practice Act
approved through the legislature. And I remember
a Dr. Cook that was also on the board at the time.
That's the only name I remember. I believe he was
from Paris, Texas. From Paris. I believe he was
German origin, wasn't he? Didn't he come from
Germany? I don't know. I never did know the man. All
right. I don't know.
your dad was, did he tell you anything about the
struggles to get this practice act passed? I know
there was quite a little opposition to it. Well,
the opposition came primarily from the ranchers
and I guess from the ranchers more so than the
farmers, but the agricultural people opposed it
at that time. I think primarily because of They
didn't, well, I guess they didn't want a
veterinarian to be licensed, or they wanted to do
it themselves. Which we had a lot of, after the
practice act, we had quite a few that were allowed
to practice for five years, I believe, under
grandfather clause. And
at the end of the five year, then they weren't
allowed to practice.
So. It was quite a struggle getting it through the
legislature. I know he told me a lot of times that
the time he spent down there trying to get it and
promote it through Mr. Rayburn,
who was our representative, he was able to help get
it through. At that time, he was representative in
the state legislature. He went on from there to
be... elected to Congress, he was extremely well
thought of in your home district, wasn't he? Oh,
yeah. He was Speaker of the House in state
legislature at the time the Practice Act went
through, and then he has since been Speaker of the
House in Congress. Yes. Your dad in 1912 was
President of the Texas Veterinary Medical
Association. Right around that time, 11 and 12,
the so-called two associations or the TVMA split
into two associations. Did your dad mention
anything about that back in those days? If he did, I
don't remember. I don't remember. That was too
long ago. I understood there was some jealousy
over who'd be granted licenses and who was not and
so forth and so on. I don't recall that, Bob. Your
daddy took you along to his practice runs in the
early days. What do you remember about those and
the things that his experiences in practice?
Well, the thing that strikes me most is the fact
that we did a lot of surgery and a lot of things
without the benefit of anesthesia that we use now.
And it
seems like every cow we went to see had milk fever.
And we had to pump them up with a pumped the udder
with a pump, and then graduated to an oxygen tank,
which was great. But I think, looking back,
probably we gave more of them mastitis with a car
pump than we did good. I don't know, but it was
remarkable the way they would get up after you'd
inflated the other and tied it off with strings and
I still don't know how it worked. What was your
procedure? You put in a teat tube and then applied
the pressure of that and inflated it? Put a teat
tube in and had it hooked to just an automobile
pump, hand pump, and that was my job was to run the
pump and As soon as we'd get the udder inflated to
tie it off, we'd use string from a pillowcase or
whatever they had and tie it off, tie the teat off,
and keep the pressure built up in the udder for a
period, I don't know how long, probably 12 hours,
something like that. You didn't have any teats
drop off from poor circulation. I don't recall it
if it did. I really wasn't worried about that. You
had to be careful how tight you tied it. Yeah,
that's right. I don't recall whether it did or not,
but like I say, I wasn't too concerned about that at
that time. I was 10, 12 years old. Back in those
days, veterinary practice didn't consist much of
herd management at all. It was more or less an
emergency type practice, wasn't it? That's
right, yes. What do you recall your daddy doing
besides the inflations?
Oh, I recall tree-finding horses. I recall
cases of... I know one case he removed a piece of
skin from a mule as big as a saddle blanket. This
mule had some kind of a... Maybe it was a malignant
tumor. I don't know what it was. But then I don't
think we considered we were concerned about
malignancy. But we would go out and castrate maybe
25, 30 mules in the morning. Everybody would bring
their mules into one central place. And we'd
castrate mules most of the day.
What did you use for topical anesthetic on those
castrations in those days, topical antiseptic?
I think he had some kind of a preparation that it
was, I have his formula. It was made up of, I think, a
little kerosene,
Some kind of acid and...
Oh, scarlet oil. Scarlet oil. Scarlet oil. That
was the primary thing. That was the big thing.
Yeah. Those mules get stiff afterwards or they get
right out and move? No, they get up. They were hard
to get down and they were glad to get up.
Did you ever need to still kiss them out to
anything? Yes. Yes, we did. But I never did get in on
those very much. It was kind of a one-man job. The
tree fighting, was that mostly to get exudate out
of the sinuses? No, I think it was mostly for the
fourth molar. Is that the one that causes the
problem? To knock the molars out? Knock the molar
out, yeah, with a punch. Yes. Yeah. Infected
fourth tooth. Yeah. Fourth cheek tooth. Well,
the day finally arrived when you could get through
veterinary school and help. And tell us about your
birth and so forth. When were you born? I was born in
Greenville, Texas, September the 2nd, 1914.
And I
attended schools here. When I graduated from high
school in 32, it was right in the middle of the
Depression. The funds weren't available to go to
school, and I had to go to work, which I did. And then
I wanted to go to A&M all the time, but it just didn't
work out. And I went to work, got a pretty good job.
Then I got married. That postponed it a while. Your
wife? Came from this area also? Yes, she did. And
her name? Her name was Elizabeth Hughes. And her
family is one of the old families here in Hunt
County, a big ranch family. And
we have two boys that are 38 and 39 now. One's in
Corpus, one's in Denison.
But back to my school, after I got... Neither of the
boys followed the veterinary profession. No,
they said there wasn't enough money in it. Tell us
about your schooling. Well, I was out of school 13
years when I went back to take English. I'd take
freshman courses. And the...
courses you know were pretty hard for I was 30 years
old when I went back to school and
I was one of the first veterans to come back on the
campus and they thought we just hung the moon that
everything was anything we wanted we could have
which worked out pretty good they helped find
housing and so forth but
I started in 45 and got out in 49. At that time, it was
a five-year course. And I had one year of one
trimester. I think my first year was a trimester
when A&M was on trimester. And so I finished in 49,
finally got my degree, came back to Greenville to
start practice. When I went to school, when I went
down there, I had enough saved up from my job that
I'd been working on. I had enough saved to go
through school, which at that time wasn't a whole
lot of money. The GI Bill helped a little also,
didn't it? Yeah, the GI Bill, which helped a lot.
Yeah, it sure did. And then I came back to
Greenville to practice. Was your dad still in
practice from the time you began? Yes. Yes, he was
still in practice. Well, that helped a whole lot,
didn't it? Oh, yeah. He had a practice waiting for
me, which was
fine. It just meant a whole lot to me to be able to
step in. He enjoyed a good reputation among his
colleagues. At the time you first went in
practice, emergency practice was still pretty
much done. so-called fire engine, run out and
treat cases in the middle of the night. What was
your earliest recollection of practices you
started in the early 50s? Well, in the early 50s,
every call I got was an emergency because I was
broke and I was hungry. And it didn't bother me to go
at 2 o'clock, 3 o'clock in the morning any more than
it did during the day because I needed to practice.
And
so lots of times, I'd be out on a case maybe all night
or most of the night. And I'm sure like you did, it
was just a case of go when they called. But the
farther along you get, the more you realize that
everything's not an emergency.
When among the, you observed your father practice
quite a bit. some tremendous advances. In fact, I
think the greatest advances have taken place in
medicine actually is what we did from the 1920s
till now. What are some of the landmarks that you
remember comparing the practice of the 20s to what
we have today? Oh, I think the greatest one is
anesthesia. Tell us the evolution of that as you
saw it. Well, I remember when I was real small, we
did a lot of surgery without anesthesia at all. We
did tree fines on horses. We did spays. And I was
just big enough to help hold. And the first
anesthesia that I recall him using was when we got
Nembutal capsules.
I know they'd break up the capsules into a little
vial with, I don't know whether the water was even
sterile or not. I think it was boiled water. I'm
sure it was. And draw it into the syringe and give it
intraperitoneally.
So
it worked. It was a lot better than it had before.
Although the popularity of such things as
sulfathiazole, sulfanilamide, and so forth was
short-lived, it really had a place where we had it,
didn't it? Well, of course, this was, yeah, sulfas
were fine when they did come in. But that was back in
the 40s, wasn't it? Yes. Yes, that was in the early
40s when the sulfanilamides came. And... I
don't know how we got along without them.
But you know, they say that we were told that 85% of
them would get well if you didn't do anything to
them, so I guess we were banking on the 85%.
Well, later on practice changed a little bit, and
things went into more herd management bases,
isn't that right? Oh yeah, the herd management
programs were, they started in about, I guess in
the 50s.
I recall that. And, well, your clients were a
better educated group of people they were taking
ag courses even though it was in high school they
were getting some ag courses and then a lot of your a
lot of your clients would were college graduates
and they respected the veterinary medicine so it
it made it made a lot of difference as far as as far as
the relationship between the client and
veterinarian. In small animal practice as things
came along what do you think are the most
significant advances we've made in the last 30
years from a small animal practice in a relatively
small town? Well there again I think the I think the
anesthesia is one of the finest things because
when I was in school In the 40s, all of our
anesthesia was, in small animal, was IV. We had no
gas machines that we used. And, of course, we all
know the value of gas as far as the mortality rate is
concerned. And, of course, the procedures. I
remember in surgery, when I was in vet school, When
we'd do a spay, our sutures were just through and
through. In fact, yours was the same way under Dr.
Armstead, wasn't it? No. Well, of course, I went to
Iowa State. Oh, you didn't go. Well, I went to
school, but after we, when I precepted,
everything was individually sutured, adenium
and muscle, fascia and skin. Well, that changed
when Dr. Lum came to A&M. Do you know? Yes. Yes. He
came out, and I forget that Dr. Lum said, we won't do
that anymore. We were just putting our through and
through, skin, peritoneum, muscle, peritoneum,
and everything. Hey. Now Annie wants to talk to
you. We were discussing anesthesias in small
animal practice. What else has changed in small
animals since... you first went and practiced it.
In the first place, the volume of practice
increased a little bit, hasn't it? The volume has
increased. The use of fluids has improved
tremendously. In
fact, early, the use of fluids was just a last
resort, more or less. But now we're using them.
right at the beginning, like they do with medical
patients, MDs. And, of course,
the vaccines have improved so much. The different
types of vaccines, we have so many different
vaccines now, but when I started, The only thing we
used was a two-way black leg or a three-way black
leg for
vaccination caves.
And now we have any number of
vaccines that We've gotten a tremendous number of
viral diseases we're vaccinating against in the
various animals, large animals especially. You
went around, do you recognize any of these things
like IBR and all those things? Were they here
before or did we just miss them? I don't believe so.
I don't believe they were here. I think they kind of
came in like the AIDS did. I think a lot of our viral
diseases have, in my experience, I don't believe
we had all of those. The same thing with feline
leukemia and with the Parvo virus, etc., etc. You
felt they're brand new, right? Well, we didn't
know anything about Parvo when I finished school
or when I first started practicing. In fact, it
came along, what, in the Of course, we did have some
acute dysentery, but they looked different.
Yeah. And a lot of those acute dysentery were from
hookworm. Yes, sir. Sure were. Well, real fine.
You've been considerably involved for a fair
amount of time in the examining board and the
practice act, and you know there's always a some
perhaps room for controversy, as to how much they
protect the public. And of course, us
veterinarians who see the inside of it think it's
very important. What's your balanced opinion of
how the Practice Act is working for what it's
supposed to do to protect the public? Well, I think
it's a tool that we need, and I think it's a tool that
I don't think we could do without it because of the
quackery and so forth that goes on. If it goes
uncontrolled, and that's the purpose of the
Practice Act, is to protect the public. And if you
have no control over it, it could be disastrous.
And we've had, I know in serving 12 years on the
examining board,
We saw many, many cases of malpractice that should
have never been by veterinarians. So you not only
protect them from the quacks, you protect the
public from the veterinarians, some of them that
are out of line. And to the drug problem among
veterinarians is raised its ugly head, and we've
had a lot of that in drug abuse in our own
profession.
The fact that the Federal Trade Commission has
gotten into the act somehow or other, it was a bit of
a surprise to us, wasn't it? In what respect? They
don't want anything which would restrain free
trade and advertising and all that sort of thing.
We try to maintain the profession on a
professional basis, and there seems to be a little
confliction there. Well, I think a whole lot of
that was resolved in Arizona versus Bates in the
advertising, and the Trade Commission got into
that, and they can now advertise like they want.
which is, I don't know whether it's good or bad.
Being from the old school, I never did condone
advertising. I thought it wasn't professional.
But evidently I'm wrong because a lot of them are
doing it, and I can't see that the world's any worse
off. One of the other things that I've more or less
felt that, people like you who had your dad in
practice and you've been on the board and you can
just look at practice from all its facets.
There's some feeling that we're kind of losing
grip as a profession and professional bearing and
it's getting on toward more of a technology and a
technician type of thing and that you don't need
the rapport with the client and the patient and so
forth the way you used to have. And if you just do
these things and do these tests, it'll all get
done. I'm sure you've had observations on that as
the years go on. Well, I don't know. I think the
farther along we get in practicing veterinary
medicine,
I believe a lot of dedication has gone out the
window.
I know that
going back to my father's practice, I've been with
him many times. We'd drive up to a place. This was
during the Depression. He'd tell me, he said,
well, son, we're not going to get paid anything for
this. But he'd do the job anyway.
He got paid for some of it. Some of it we got
chickens, some of it different things,
vegetables and whatever. But
he was doing it for a living. Don't misunderstand
me that. But I never knew how he turned down a call to
someone that had an animal that was sick. And I
tried to do that myself.
The pride in a difficult job well done
meant a lot to you, didn't it? Yes, it sure did, sure
did.
I guess we've brought that on ourselves, though,
you know. The doctors have been smart enough to
say, well, now look here, we're not sure about
this. We're going to have to send some of this into
the laboratory. We're going to have to do this and
that and the other. But we thought we had to give a
diagnosis right across the table, you know.